Targeting Python 2+3
--------------------

In a lot of cases you might want to develop programs which can be run in
both, Python 2+ and 3+.

Just imagine that you have a very popular python module which is use by
hundreds of people but not all of them have python 2 or 3. In that case
you have two choices. The first one is to distribute 2 modules, one for
python 2 and the other for python 3. The other choice is to modify your
current code and make is compatible with both python 2 and 3.

In this section I am going to highlight some of the tricks which you can
employ to make a script compatible with both of them.

**Future imports**

The first and most important method is to use ``__future__`` imports. It
allows you to import Python 3 functionality in Python 2. Here is an
example:

-  Context manager were new in Python 3. For using them in Python 2.5+
   you can use:

.. code:: python

    from __future__ import with_statement

-  ``print`` function

``print`` was changed to a function in Python 3. If you want to use it
in Python 2 you can import it from ``__future__``.

.. code:: python

    print
    # Output:

    from __future__ import print_function
    print
    # Output: <built-in function print>

**Using ``as`` in imports**

First tell me how you import packages in your script ? Most of us do
this :

.. code:: python

    import foo
    # or
    from foo import bar

Do you know that you can do something like this as well?

.. code:: python

    import foo as foo

I know itâ€™s function is the same as above listed code but it is vital
for making your script compatible with python 2 and 3. Now examine the
code below :

.. code:: python

    try:
        import urllib.request as urllib_request #for python 3
    except ImportError:
        import urllib2 as urllib_request # for python 2

So let me explain the above code a little. We are wrapping our importing
code in a try except clause. We are doing it because in python2 there is
no urllib.request module and will result in an ImportError. The
functionality of urllib.request is provided by urllib2 module in
python2. So now when in Python2 we try to import ``urllib.request`` and
get an ``ImportError`` we tell Python to import urllib2 instead.

The final thing you need to know about is the ``as`` keyword. It is
mapping the imported module to ``urllib_request``. So that now all of
the Classes and methods of urllib2 are available to us by
urllib\_request.

**Obsolete Python 2 builtins**

Another thing to keep in mind is that there are 12 Python 2 builtins
which have been removed from Python 3. Make sure that you don't use them
in Python 2 as well in order to make your code compatible with Python 3.
Here is a way to enforce you to abandon these 12 builtins in Python 2 as
well.

.. code:: python

    from future.builtins.disabled import *

Now whenever you try to use the modules which are abandoned in Python 3,
it raises a NameError like this:

.. code:: python

    from future.builtins.disabled import *

    apply()
    # Output: NameError: obsolete Python 2 builtin apply is disabled

**External standard-library backports**

There are a few packages in the wild which provide Python 3
functionality in Python 2. For instance we have:

-  enum ``pip install enum34``
-  singledispatch ``pip install singledispatch``
-  pathlib ``pip install pathlib``

I am sure there are a lot of other methods and tricks which can be used
to make you code compatible with both of these Python series. This was
just to give you some ideas.
